+++
date = "04 Sep 2021"
draft = false
title = "Course Update"
author = "Course Staff"
+++

Our plan for how to use the full class meeting times has adapted from
our original plan - we'll provide more justification for the change
below, but the plan now is:

- Monday classes will be for covering examples, providing context, and
  answering student questions about the current week's content,
  designed to help students understand the materials you will be
  assessed on during your cohort meetings. These will be before any of
  that week's assessed cohort meetings, so all students will have the
  chance to benefit from these before your assessed cohort meetings.

- Wednesday classes will not cover anything directly related to the
  current week's content (since this seems unfair to students who have
  their assessed cohort meetings on that material on Mondays or
  Tuesdays), but instead will include discussion of the previous
  week's problems (so we may discuss problems from week 1 on September
  8) and excursions into topics we think are interesting and
  enlightening, and that have some connection to the course content,
  but that we don't expect would provide any help for the specific
  cohort problems you are being assessed on that week.

All the full class meetings are still strictly optional, and we will
not be introducing any new material that you will be assessed on
during these meetings. We will also be live streaming and recording
them - sorry we have had troubles getting decent video and audio for
previous classes. We are working with UVA classroom support to find
the best way to prevent this in the future.

We apologize for any initial confusion about this, but we've
come to the realization that the plan we had on the syllabus doesn't
make much sense. We worked out the cohort structure during our online
semesters, and the response from the past students was so
overwhelmingly positive that we wanted to figure out how to make it
work for this semester as well. There are some non-trivial adaptations
required to do this, and we're still figuring some of that out. The
most substantial change for this semester is going to be how to best
use our lecture time.

We don't want to just use lecture time to teach content like we did
pre-pandemic, since we don't want there to be any pressure on students
who might feel sick, have risk profiles that make them uncomfortable
in high density indoor settings, or otherwise be at risk to come to
class. We also think the video materials we've produced over the past
year are quite good and cover the course content better than we would
in new live lectures (while providing students with a lot more
flexibility how and when to watch them).

Upon reflection, however, our original plan of essentially duplicating
the Monday classes on Wednesdays, and expecting students in
Monday-Wednesday cohorts to show up on Mondays, and others to show up
on Wednesdays, doesn't seem fair to students or make the best use of
class time. You're paying tuition for a class that is supposed to have
two full class meetings a week, so despite what we said Wednesday
about the expected financial return from learning CS theory, its not
fair to design the class around assuming you would only have one class
a week. But, it also seems like it would be frustrating to students in
the Monday-Tuesday cohorts if we cover materials relevant to the
cohort problems on which they were already assessed in Wednesday
classes. We hope the new plan solves this - it allows everyone in the
class to have a full class meeting that is designed to help on
understanding the content you'll be assessed on in that week's cohort
meeting, and hopefully will allow us to cover a lot of interesting and
worthwhile material in the Wednesday classes.

We won't make any promises about this model being in effect until,
say, October 1, but will continue to adapt what we do in the full
class meetings as the semester progresses. The one main risk in this,
though, is if we don't hear from students who are not coming to
classes but would if we were doing something else about why they are
not coming and how to make classes more worthwhile, we are likely to
adapt mostly based on what we hear from the students who do come to
the classes.

Thanks for your patience as we develop this new model, and do let
please us know any suggestions or ideas you have.
