+++
date = "08 Nov 2020"
draft = false
title = "Week 12"
slug="week12"
+++

Wow, the final week - congratulations!

This week is different from previous weeks: there is no new technical
content, and no cohort problems. Instead, the goal of this week is for
you to do something that either synthesizes a key idea from the class,
or explores a topic of your choice related to theoretical computer
science.

Although it will be sufficient to earn full credit this week to do
something that just benefits your own understanding, we hope some of
you will produce artifacts that will have value beyond this.

## Collaboration Options

For this assignment, you may decide to work individually, with one or
two others in a small team, combine efforts across your full cohort,
or combine efforts across multiple cohorts.

[TODO: let's discuss this - draft idea here, but maybe we want to restrict to in-cohort?]

Your team may be as large as you want, but the expectations for
quality and value of your submission scale according to the square
root of the number of members on your team (that is, a team with 4
people should do something twice as impressive as an individual to
merit the same credit; if you are able to convince all of the other
286 students in the class to join your team, you should do something
approximately 17 times as impressive as what would be expected from a
single student). You are welcome to include people not in the class in
your team (and they do not increase the value of _N_). We expect most
students will want to work within your own cohort, and this has lots
of scheduling advantages, but if you are eager to work with someone in
the class who is not in your cohort, you can do so. In such cases, the
project should be presented at both of your cohort meetings.

## Assignment

**Create an artifact that conveys some idea related to this class.**

Your artifact can be anything you want, so long as it includes some
representation as a finite sequence of bits that can be posted on the
Internet. Examples of possible artifacts include a written story, a
comic, a video, a song (lyrics), or an interpretive dance.

If your artifact cannot be posted on the Internet (for example, if you
bake lasagna, build a quantum computer, or develop a time machine) you
should still make some description of your artifact (including a video
or pictures if helpful) that can be posted.

## Target Audience

You can define your target audience but should specify what it
is. Examples of target audiences include “five year olds”, “typical
third graders”, “your parents”, "professional programmers without
formal CS background", “UVa students majoring in history”, “Martians”,
“cs1110 students”, or "future cs3102 students".

## Evaluation Criteria

At the Week 12 assessed cohort meeting, you will present your artifact
to your cohort, and your Cohort Leader (and cohortmates) may ask
questions about it. 

Your artifact will be evaluated on technical correctness and perceived
effectiveness in conveying an important idea to your defined target
audience. Aesthetic merit, entertainment value, production quality,
and creativity are also important, but only in as much as they support
the goal of conveying an idea related to theoretical computer science
to your target audience.

[TODO: eligibility for >3 points - must either agree to have your
cohort presentation recorded for review by the course staff, or submit
a stand-alone version of your artifact.]

## Motivating Examples

TODO:
update with some selections from [https://uvacs2102.github.io/ps/psomega/](https://uvacs2102.github.io/ps/psomega/) and
[https://uvacs2102.github.io/psomega/](https://uvacs2102.github.io/psomega/).






