+++
date = "23 Aug 2021"
draft = false
title = "Starting the Semester"
slug = "starting"
+++
 
## First Class Meeting

Our first scheduled class is Wednesday, 25 August, 3:30-4:45pm in
Maury Hall 209 (weather permitting, we will also use the Ampitheater
space outside Maury). 

For this optional first class meeting, we will have an open "meet and
greet" with an opportunity to ask any questions you would like of the
course instructors, and an opportunity for students who wish to form
their own cohorts (details below) to do so. There won't be any lecture
or course content introduced, or need to crowd into the classroom.
Please read the [Syllabus](/syllabus) to understand how the class will
be run and what we mean by "cohorts".

## Cohort Scheduling

There will be a form posted tomorrow (Wednesday, 25 August) for
students to submit cohort scheduling preferences. Everyone will need
to do this by **Wednesday at 4:59pm** in order for us to assign and
schedule the cohorts. You can submit the form during the scheduled
class time tomorrow, and everyone in the class should be able to
submit the form by the end of this time.

If you would like to form your own cohort, you may attempt to do so
during the class time Wednesday. Forming your own cohort is totally
optional, but Wednesday's class meeting is your only opportunity to
request a cohort group. After 4:45pm on Wednesday, we will be
assigning all students who have not successfully formed their own
cohorts to cohorts based on the scheduling information you submitted.

In order to successfully form a cohort, you would need to:

- Form a group of exactly six students (all of whom are enrolled in cs3102).

- Identify a time that works for everyone for their prep meetings, and
a set of possible times for your assessed cohort meetings. For your
cohort to be accepted, we need to be able to match your available
times with a time when there is a Cohort Leader (TA) available. So, it
is to your advantage to list as many times as possible that work for
everyone in your cohort.

- Come to one of us (Nathan or Dave) during the class time Wednesday
with a list on paper of their names and email IDs, the times for their
prep meeting, and possible times for assessed cohort meetings. You
will need to also submit this in a web form so we have it
electronically, and what they submit there must match what is on the
paper.

- Convince us that the proposed cohort satisfies our diversity
criteria. We do not have a formal specification of what is
satisfactory, but at a minimum it should be a cohort cannot include
more than 3 people who went to the same high school. In forming your
cohort you should think about what will make it a good learning
community. 

We will do our best to keep students who successfully do all of this
by the end of the class time Wednesday in their requested cohort, but
cannot promise this since it may be necessary to adjust things because
of TA schedules and other constraints.

Assessed cohort meetings will start (at the ealiest) on Tuesday, 31
August, so students scheduled in Tuesday cohorts will have preparation
Cohort Meetings on Saturday or Sunday (28 or 29 August), and will need
to be ready with the [Week 1](/week1) problems by their cohort meeting
on 31 August. (Other students will have more time, depending on when
your assessed cohort meeting is scheduled.)





